\section{Previous work}

\subsection{Overview of existing techniques}

In his excellent paper describing how \sbcl{} is bootstrapped
\cite{Rhodes:2008:SSC:1482373.1482380}, Rhodes gives an overview of
how different existing \commonlisp{} systems are made to evolve.
Below, we summarize the contents of that paper.

We can roughly divide \commonlisp{} implementations into those that
are mostly written in some other language, and those that are mostly
written in \commonlisp{}.

In the first category, there are implementations that specifically
cater to applications written in that other language and that need
some scripting capabilities that are supplied by the \commonlisp{}
implementation.  Whether it is advantageous or not for these
implementations to be written mainly in that other language is outside
the scope of this paper.  Other implementations in the first category
are written that other language for other reasons that are also
unimportant to this paper.

Of the implementations in the second category that are currently
actively used, Rhodes claims%
\footnote{For the commercial \commonlisp{} implementations cited in
  the paper by Rhodes, he includes a disclaimer that only anecdotal
  evidence for this information is available.}
that \allegro{}, \lispworks{}, \cmucl{}, Scieneer, and \ccl{} are only
possible to build using older versions of the same system, and only
using image-based techniques.  Only \sbcl{} can be bootstrapped using
several other \commonlisp{} implementations.

Even a \commonlisp{} implementation that is largely written in
\commonlisp{} such as \sbcl{} has some amount of code written in other
languages.  In the case of \sbcl{}, Rhodes gives the number
$35\thinspace000$ lines of \clanguage{} and assembly code ``for
services such as signal handling and garbage collection'', of which
$8\thinspace000$ is for the garbage collector.  The remaining lines
can be summarized as around $2\thinspace000$ lines per operating
system supported.  This amount of code written in other languages is
very modest.

\subsection{Specific \commonlisp{} issues}

Because of the way compilation is defined by the \commonlisp{}
standard, there are some issues that need to be resolved in order for
it to be possible for a target \commonlisp{} system to be bootstrapped
on a host \commonlisp{} system.
